Distant Reading of Gratian’s _Decretum_
=======================================
Statement of the Problem and Background
---------------------------------------
Gratian, an otherwise unknown teacher, finished compiling and writing the _Concordia Discordantium Canonum_ ("Agreement of Disagreeing Canons") or _Decretum_ around 1140 in Bologna as a textbook for university students studying canon law. In 1996, Anders Winroth discovered that there were two versions or recensions of the _Decretum_, and that four surviving 12th-century manuscripts preserve the text of the first recension. Winroth argued that different authors (Gratian 1 and Gratian 2) compiled and wrote the two recensions, and that it was the first recension that the author finished and began to circulate around 1140, not the second.

Gratian compiled the _Decretum_ out of canons taken from decrees of church councils, from papal letters, from Roman law, and from patristic authors like Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, and Gregory. Gratian collected the texts for the canons that he used from formal sources (previous canonical collections) as opposed to material (original) sources. There are 1,860 canons in the first recension and 3,945 in the second. On his own authority as a jurist, he commented on the canons in the form of sayings or _dicta_. Gratian organized the canons and _dicta_ in the first part of the _Decretum_ into 101 distinctions and those in the second part into 36 cases. He introduced each of the cases in the second part with a hypothetical case statement that sets out the facts the case and divides it into questions. In addition to the cases, the second part of the _Decretum_ includes a treatise on penance (de Penitentia). The third part, a treatise on the sacraments (_de Consecratione_), was added to the _Decretum_ at a late stage in the composition of the second recension. Other teachers of canon law added approximately 150 canons (_paleae_) to the second recension after it began to circulate.

Winroth’s identification of the Florence (Fd), Barcelona (Bc), Paris (P), and Admont (Aa) manuscripts as a first recension of Gratian’s _Decretum_ has been generally accepted, but some of the conclusions he drew from the discovery remain controversial. Winroth argues that Gratian 1 and Gratian 2 were probably not the same person, because Gratian 2 makes much fuller use of the _Codex_ and _Digest_ of Justinian than does Gratian 1, whose Roman law sources were largely limited to excerpts from barbarian legal codes that he found in previous canonical collections. Pennington argues that Gratian made earlier and more sophisticated use of Roman law concepts and terminology than Winroth gives Gratian credit for, but his argument depends in part on evidence from the St. Gall (Sg) manuscript of the _Decretum_, which Winroth rejects as an abbreviation.

Moreover, Winroth rejects the hypothesis that a _dictum_ that apparently refers to the Second Lateran Council of 1139 is an interpolation. He is consequently committed to a late date for the first recension (around 1140). Winroth originally argued for a late date (mid-1150s) for the second recension as well, but as evidence emerged that the second recension was in general circulation by 1150, he shifted to arguing for a period of just a few years between the first and second recensions, while continuing to insist that 1140 is the earliest possible date for the first recension, and that the first and second recensions are the work of two different individuals. Recently, Winroth reexamined the 12th-century tradition that Gratian had been a bishop, and argues that a "Gratian of Chiusi, bishop" mentioned in a Siena necrology, who may have died in 1144 or 1145, is the Master Gratian responsible for the first recension of the _Decretum_. Winroth considers this further evidence that Gratian 1 and Gratian 2 were not the same person.

The controversy over the identity of Gratian is an aspect of a broader debate over what the discovery of the recension preserved in Fd, Bc, P, and Aa adds to our understanding of the evolution of the _Decretum_. For the last fifteen years, that debate has revolved primarily around the question of whether Sg represents a recension of the _Decretum_ earlier than the first recension. Winroth maintains that the first recension was a finished product that Gratian 1 released into circulation, and that Sg is an abbreviation of the first recension. Pennington, on the other hand, argues that both Sg and the first recension are snapshots taken at particular moments in a much longer process of continuous textual evolution (going back as far as the 1120s), and that Sg represents an earlier stage in the development of the _Decretum_ than the first recension. The debate over Sg has been fought to a stalemate, and new evidence is needed to move the discussion forward.
Purpose
-------
The purpose of the project is to reconsider the debates over the identity of Gratian and the evolution of the _Decretum_ between the first and second recensions using statistical analysis of word frequencies in the text as evidence. The first question concerns the identity of Gratian: whether or not the _Decretum_ is the work of a single master who compiled the canons and composed the case statements and _dicta_ organizing the presentation of and commenting on those canons. The result will be an assessment of the likelihood that the case statement and _dicta_ were written by one, two, or more authors.
Many topics that Gratian covered in the first recension were expanded upon in the second recension by the incorporation of additional canons and _dicta_. At least one entirely new topic – the status of Jews in canon law – was added in the second recension. The second question concerns the evolution of the text of the _Decretum_ between the first and second recensions: what other entirely new topics were added to the _Decretum_ in the second recension? The result will be the identification of additional entirely new topics, if any.
Methodology
-----------
Ideally, electronic texts of good critical editions of the first and second recensions of the _Decretum_, following consistent orthographic conventions, would be available for analysis. In practice, what is available is the electronic text of Friedberg's problematic 1879 edition of the _Decretum_ that the MGH used to produce its Gratian concordance. Friedberg's text can be transformed into a proxy for the second recension by removing _de Consecratione_ and the _paleae_. The resulting second recension text can then be transformed into a proxy for the first recension by applying the differences found in The Making of Gratian's _Decretum_.

For authorship attribution, we are interested in analyzing common function words like conjunctions and prepositions in the case statements and the _dicta_ – those parts of the text of the _Decretum_ attributed since the 12th century to Gratian himself. Three samples are used: the case statements, which do not differ substantially between the first and second recensions; the first recension _dicta_; and a sample including _dicta_ found only in the second recension, plus words that appear only in the second-recension forms of those _dicta_ that differ between the first and second recension. The statistical frequency of the function words in each of the samples will then be analyzed using principal component analysis to determine whether it is possible to distinguish the author(s) of the case statements and the first and second-recension _dicta_ from one another. Principal component analysis is concerned only with words that are indeclinable forms in Latin, so there is no need to lemmatize the samples.

To identify entirely new topics added to the second recension of the _Decretum_, we are interested in analyzing content words in both the _dicta_ and the canons. Two samples are used: the first-recension _dicta_ and canons; and a sample including _dicta_ and canons found only in the second recension, plus words that appear only in the second-recension forms of those _dicta_ and canons that differ between the first and second recensions. A list of common stop words found in Wortkonkordanz zum _Decretum_ Gratiani will first be removed from the samples, which will then be lemmatized using the Schinke Latin word stemming algorithm. (The lemmatization algorithm uses an exclusion list of words ending in –que for which the ending is interpreted as part of the word rather than as an enclitic. Preliminary results indicate that the list needs further refinement.) Finally, the statistical frequency of unique or most distinctive words will be used to determine whether it is possible to identify topics which appear only in the second recension. If new topics are identified, they will be verifiable by close reading. Traditional scholarly methods can then be used to more fully explore their implications for our understanding of the evolution of the text of the _Decretum_ between the first and second recensions.

Python and the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) will be used for corpus preparation. R and the Stylometry with R package (stylo) will be used for Principal Component Analysis and for analysis of Most Distinctive Words.
